Dec 22, 2011

In this release we include updates to the habitat risk assessment
model, updates to Coastal Vulnerability Tier 0 (previously named
Coastal Protection), and a new tier 1 Coastal Vulnerability tool.
Additionally, we are releasing a beta version of our 3.0 platform that
includes the terrestrial timber and carbon models.

See the "Marine Models" and "InVEST 3.0 Beta" sections below for more details.

Marine Models
#############

1. Marine Python Extension Check
   This tool has been updated to include extension requirements for the new
   Coastal Protection T1 model.  It also reflects changes to the Habitat Risk
   Assessment and Coastal Protection T0 models, as they no longer require the 
   PythonWin extension.


2. Habitat Risk Assessment (HRA)
  This model has been updated and is now part of three-step toolset.  The 
  first step is a new “Ratings Survey Tool” which eliminates the need for 
  Microsoft Excel when users are providing habitat-stressor ratings.  This 
  Survey Tool now allows users to up- and down-weight the importance of 
  various criteria.  For step 2, a copy of the Grid the Seascape tool has been
  placed in the HRA toolset.  In the last step, users will run the HRA model
  which includes the following updates:
  - New habitat outputs classifying risk as low, medium, and high
  - Model run status updates (% complete) in the message window
  - Improved habitat risk plots embedded in the output HTML


3. Coastal Protection
  This module is now split into sub-models, each with two parts.  The first 
  sub-model is Coastal Vulnerability (Tier 0) and the new addition is Coastal
  Protection (Tier 1).

  Coastal Vulnerability (T0)
  Step 1) Fetch Calculator - there are no updates to this tool.
  Step 2) Vulnerability Index 
  - Wave Exposure: In this version of the model, we define wave exposure for 
    sites facing the open ocean as the maximum of the weighted average of 
    wave’s power coming from the ocean or generated by local winds.  We 
    weight wave power coming from each of the 16 equiangular sector by the 
    percent of time that waves occur in that sector, and based on whether or 
    not fetch in that sector exceeds 20km.  For sites that are sheltered, wave
    exposure is the average of wave power generated by the local storm winds 
    weighted by the percent occurrence of those winds in each sector.  This 
    new method takes into account the seasonality of wind and wave patterns 
    (storm waves generally come from a preferential direction), and helps 
    identify regions that are not exposed to powerful waves although they are 
    open to the ocean (e.g. the leeside of islands).

  - Natural Habitats: The ranking is now computed using the rank of all 
    natural habitats present in front of a segment, and we weight the lowest 
    ranking habitat 50% more than all other habitats.  Also, rankings and 
    protective distance information are to be provided by CSV file instead of 
    Excel.  With this new method, shoreline segments that have more habitats 
    than others will have a lower risk of inundation and/or erosion during 
    storms.

  - Structures: The model has been updated to now incorporate the presence of 
    structures by decreasing the ranking of shoreline segments that adjoin 
    structures.

  Coastal Protection (T1) - This is a new model which plots the amount of 
  sandy beach erosion or consolidated bed scour that backshore regions 
  experience in the presence or absence of natural habitats.  It is composed 
  of two steps: a Profile Generator and Nearshore Waves and Erosion.  It is 
  recommended to run the Profile Generator before the Nearshore Waves and 
  Erosion model.

  Step 1) Profile Generator – This tool helps the user generate a 1-dimensional
  bathymetric and topographic profile perpendicular to the shoreline at the 
  user-defined location.  This model provides plenty of guidance for building 
  backshore profiles for beaches, marshes and mangroves.  It will help users 
  modify bathymetry profiles that they already have, or can generate profiles 
  for sandy beaches if the user has not bathymetric data.  Also, the model 
  estimates and maps the location of natural habitats present in front of the 
  region of interest.  Finally, it provides sample wave and wind data that 
  can be later used in the Nearshore Waves and Erosion model, based on 
  computed fetch values and default Wave Watch III data.

  Step 2) Nearshore Waves and Erosion – This model estimates profiles of beach
  erosion or values of rates of consolidated bed scour at a site as a function
  of the type of habitats present in the area of interest.  The model takes 
  into account the protective effects of vegetation, coral and oyster reefs, 
  and sand dunes.  It also shows the difference of protection provided when 
  those habitats are present, degraded, or gone.


4. Aesthetic Quality
  This model no longer requires users to provide a projection for Overlap 
  Analysis.  Instead, it uses the projection from the user-specified Area of 
  Interest (AOI) polygon.  Additionally, the population estimates for this 
  model have been fixed.

InVEST 3.0 Beta
###############

The 2.2.0 release includes a preliminary version of our InVEST 3.0 beta
platform.  It is included as a toolset named "InVEST 3.0 Beta" in the 
InVEST220.tbx.  It is currently only supported with ArcGIS 10.  To launch
an InVEST 3.0 beta tool, double click on the desired tool in the InVEST 3.0 
toolset then click "Ok" on the Arc toolbox screen that opens. The InVEST 3.0
tool panel has inputs very similar to the InVEST 2.2.0 versions of the tools 
with the following modifications:

InVEST 3.0 Carbon:
  * Fixes a minor bug in the 2.2 version that ignored floating point values
    in carbon pool inputs.
  * Separation of carbon model into a biophysical and valuation model.
  * Calculates carbon storage and sequestration at the minimum resolution of
    the input maps.
  * Runtime efficiency improved by an order of magnitude.
  * User interface streamlined including dynamic activation of inputs based
    on user preference, direct link to documentation, and recall of inputs
    based on user's previous run.
    
InVEST 3.0 Timber:
  * User interface streamlined including dynamic activation of inputs based
    on user preference, direct link to documentation, and recall of inputs
    based on user's previous run.
